docs(esl-event-listener): `esl-event-listener` module updated documentation & type fixes (#1451)
exadel-inc/esl: src/modules/esl-event-listener/README.md

# ESL Event Listener module

Version: *2.0.0*.

Authors: *Alexey Stsefanovich (ala'n)*.

<a name="intro"></a>

Starting from the 4th release ESL has a built-in mechanism to work with DOM events.
ESL event listeners have more control and more advanced features than native DOM API has.

> Besides, the [`ESlBaseElement`](../esl-base-element/README.md) and [`ESLMixinElement`](../esl-mixin-element/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides, the [`ESlBaseElement`](../esl-base-element/README.md) and the [`ESLMixinElement`](../esl-mixin-element/README.md)
```

> have even more pre-built syntax sugar to make the consumer's code small and concise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have even more pre-built syntax sugar to make the consumer's code smaller and more concise.
```

> have even more pre-built syntax sugar to make the consumer's code small and concise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have even more pre-built syntax sugar to make the consumer's code briefer.
```

One of the main advantages of ESL listeners over the native DOM events API is the extended control of subscriptions.
All ESL listeners and their declarations are saved and associated with the host element, so the
ESL listeners can be created or unhooked at any time in a variety of ways.
And most importantly, you do not need the original callback handler to do this.

---

## Basic concepts

The ESL event listener module is based on the following major terms and classes:

### The `host`

Everything that happens with ESL event listeners should be associated with the `host` object.
The `host` object is not necessarily related to EventTarget, it's the object "owner" (consumer) of the subscription.

> The `host` is an EventTarget to subscribe by default (access native DOM Event API using host).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `host` is an `EventTarget` to subscribe by default (access native DOM Event API using host).
```

But API has at least two options to change the target. First of all you can define the target explicitly.
Another way is to specify the default DOM target of the host object by providing a special `$host` key
(the same as `ESLMixinElement` does).

The `host` object is also used as a context to call the handler function of the subscription.

### The `handler`

`handler` is a function that is used to process subscription event.
ESL declares a generic type to describe such functions - `ESLListenerHandler`;

```typescript
export type ESLListenerHandler<EType extends Event = Event> = (event: EType) => void;
```

### The `ESLEventListener` class and *subscription*

The subscriptions created by the ESL event listener module are instances of `ESLEventListener` class.
All active subscriptions are stored in the hidden property under the `host` object.

> All of them consists of the following major properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of them consist of the following major properties:
```

- `event` - the event type that the subscription is listening to;

> - `handler` - reference for the function to call to handle the event;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `handler` - the reference for the function to call to handle the event;
```

> - `host` - reference for holder `host` object;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `host` - the reference for holder `host` object;
```

- `target` - the definition of `EventTarget` element (or string `TraversingQuery` to find it, see details in `ESLEventDesriptor`)
- `selector` - CSS selector to use pre-build check capabilities to use event delegation; 

> - `capture` - the marker to use the capture phase of the DOM event live-cycle;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `capture` - the marker to use the capture phase of the DOM event life-cycle;
```

> - `passive` - use passive (non blocking) subscription of the native event (if supported);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `passive` - use passive (non-blocking) subscription of the native event (if supported);
```

- `once` - the marker to destroy the subscription after the first event catch;

> - `auto` - the  marker for subscription created based on an auto-collectable definition of the host

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `auto` - the marker for subscription created based on an auto-collectable definition of the host
```

>   (see [Automatic (collectible) descriptors](#automatic-collectible-descriptors));

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  (see [Automatic (collectible) descriptors](#automatic-collectible-descriptors)).
```

> All of the `ESLEventListener` instance fields are readonly, the subscription can't be changed when it's created. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All of the `ESLEventListener` instance fields are read-only, the subscription can't be changed once created. 
```

The `ESLEventListener`, as a class, describes the subscription behavior as well as
contains static methods to create and manage subscriptions.

### Descriptors (`ESLEventDesriptor`, `ESLEventDesriptorFn`)

The event listener *Descriptor* is an object to describe future subscriptions.
The ESL event listeners module has a couple of special details regarding such objects.

A simple descriptor is an object that you should pass to API to create a subscription.
It contains almost the same set of keys that the `ESLEventListener` instance does.

> In addition to that ESL allows you to combine the  `ESLEventDesriptor` data with the handler function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to that ESL allows you to combine the `ESLEventDesriptor` data with the handler function.
```

`ESLEventDesriptorFn` is a function handler that is decorated with the `ESLEventDesriptor` properties.

Here is the list of supported keys of `ESLEventDesriptor`:

- #### `event` key
  <u>Type:</u> `string | PropertyProvider<string>`  
  <u>Description:</u> the event type for subscription. 
  Can be provided as a string or via provider function that will be called in the runtime before exact subscription.

  The event string (as literal or returned by `PropertyProvider`) can declare multiple event types separated by space symbol.
  ESL will create multiple subscriptions `ESLEventListener` object for each event separately in this case.  

- #### `target` key
  <u>Type:</u> `string | EventTarget | EventTarget[] | PropertyProvider<string | EventTarget | EventTarget[]>`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `host` object itself or `$host` key of the `host` object  
  <u>Description:</u> the key to declare exact EventTarget for subscription.

>   In case the `target` key is a string then it considered as a [`TraversingQuery`](../esl-traversing-query/README.md) to find 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In case the `target` key is a string it considered as a [`TraversingQuery`](../esl-traversing-query/README.md) to find 
```

  a target relatively to `host | host.$host` object or absolutely in bounds of the active DOM tree.

>   The `target` key is also supports an exact reference(s) for `EventTargets`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `target` key also supports an exact reference(s) for `EventTargets`. 
```

  
- #### `selector` key
  <u>Type:</u> `string | PropertyProvider<string>`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `null`  
  <u>Description:</u> the CSS selector to check the event bubbling chain.
  The property to use OOTB event delegation check of target.
  
  Supports `PropertyProvider` to declare the computed value as well.
  
- #### `capture` key
  <u>Type:</u> `boolean`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `false`  
  <u>Description:</u> marker to use capturing phase of the DOM event to handle.
 
- #### `passive` key
  <u>Type:</u> `boolean`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `false`  
  <u>Description:</u> marker to use passive subscription to the native event.

  ⚠ ESL uses passive subscription by default for `wheel`, `mousewheel`, `touchstart`, `touchmove` events.
  You need to declare `passive` key explicitly to override such behavior.
  
- #### `once` key
  <u>Type:</u> `boolean`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `false`  
  <u>Description:</u> marker to unsubscribe listener with the first successful handling of the event.

- #### `auto` key (for `ESLEventDesriptorFn` declaration only)
  <u>Type:</u> `boolean`  
  <u>Default Value:</u> `false` for `ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor`, `true` for `@listen`  

>   <u>Description:</u> marker to make an auto-subscribable descriptor. See [Automatic (collectible) descriptors](#automatic-collectible-descriptors).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  <u>Description:</u> marker to make an auto-subscribable descriptor. See [Automatic (collectable) descriptors](#automatic-collectable-descriptors).
```
The `collectible` is a noun and the `collectable` is an adjective, isn't it?
Not sure about `subscribable ` =)

  
- #### `inherit` key (for `ESLEventDesriptorExt` only)
  <u>Type:</u> `boolean`  
  <u>Description:</u> available in extended version of `ESLEventDesriptor` that used in descriptor declaration API.
  Allows to inherit `ESLEventDesriptor` data from the `ESLEventDesriptorFn` declared with the same key in the property chain 
  of currently decorated  `ESLEventDesriptorFn` holder. See `initDescriptor` usages example.
  

> ### <a name="automatic-collectible-descriptors">Automatic (collectible) descriptors</a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### <a name="automatic-collectable-descriptors">Automatic (collectable) descriptors</a>
```

> If the `ESLEventDesriptorFn` is declared with the `auto` marker of the associated definition 
> it became auto-collectable for the ESL event listeners module.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the `ESLEventDesriptorFn` is declared with the `auto` marker of the associated definition,
it becomes auto-collectable for the ESL event listeners module.
```

Auto-collectable (or auto-subscribable) descriptors should be declared with `ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor` or
`@listen` decorator as they are also stored under the special private collection of the holder object.
That means you can make all auto-collectable descriptors to be subscribed at once in the future.

> The `ESLBaseElment` and `ESLMixinElement` do it in the `connectedCallback` OOTB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ESLBaseElment` and the `ESLMixinElement` do it in the `connectedCallback` OOTB.
```

> See the usage of [`ESLEventUtils.subscibe`](#-esleventutilssubscribe) for more details.

Reviewer 4: `(#-esleventutilssubscribe)` - does it work?

Author: Not at all )
Create #1457 and temporarily made a workaround on the page.

### `PropertyProvider` for `event`, `selector`, or `target`

> As the declaration of descriptor usually happens with the class declaration, when the instance and its subscription

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As the descriptor declaration usually happens with the class declaration, when the instance and its subscription
```

> does not exist, we can faced with the problem if we want to pass subscription parameters that depend on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
don't exist, we can face with the problem of passing subscription parameters that depend on the
```

> As the declaration of descriptor usually happens with the class declaration, when the instance and its subscription
> does not exist, we can faced with the problem if we want to pass subscription parameters that depend on the
> instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the declaration of descriptor usually happens with the class declaration, when the instance and its subscription
do not exist, we can face the problem if we want to pass subscription parameters that depend on the
instance.
```

In purpose to resolve such cases, the `event`, `selector`, and `target` keys of ESL event listener API supports
PropertyProvider style to declare it
```typescript
type PropertyProvider<T> = (this: unknown, that: unknown) => T;
```

See the usage example in the [ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor](#-esleventutilsinitdescriptor) sections.

---

## Public API (`ESLEventUtils`)

> The units mentioned previously are mostly implementation details of the module.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The units mentioned earlier are basically implementation details of the module.
```

`ESLEventUtils` is the root class for the event listener module. It's a facade for all ESL event listener module capabilities.

Here is the module Public API:

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.subscribe`
`ESLEventUtils.subscribe` is the main method to create and subscribe `ESLEventListener`.

> - Subscribe all auto-collectable (subscribable) descriptors of the `host` object:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Subscribes all auto-collectable (subscribable) descriptors of the `host` object:
```

    ```typescript
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(host: object)
    ```

> - Subscribe `handler` function to the DOM event declared by `eventType` string:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Subscribes `handler` function to the DOM event declared by `eventType` string:
```

    ```typescript
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(host: object, eventType: string, handler: ESLListenerHandler)
    ```
- Subscribes `descriptorFn` type of `ESLEventDescriptorFn` by embedded meta-information:
    ```typescript
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(host: object, descriptorFn: ESLEventDescriptorFn)
    ```
- Subscribes `handler` function by `ESLEventDescriptor` passed data:
    ```typescript
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(host: object, descriptor: ESLEventDescriptor, handler: ESLListenerHandler)
    ```
- Subscribes `handler` type of `ESLEventDescriptorFn` with `ESLEventDescriptor` overriding meta-data:
    ```typescript
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(host: object, descriptorFn: ESLEventDescriptor, handler: ESLEventDescriptorFn)
    ```

**Parameters**:
- `host` - host element to store subscription (event target by default);
- `eventType` - string DOM event type;
- `descriptor` - event description data (`ESLEventDescriptor`);

> - `descriptorFn` - an instance of decorated as a descriptor function `ESLEventDescriptorFn`;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `descriptorFn` - instance of decorated as a descriptor function `ESLEventDescriptorFn`;
```

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.unsubscribe`

Method of the `ESLEventUtils` interface that allows to unsubscribe existing subscriptions.

```typescript
unsubscribe(host: HTMLElement, ...criteria: ESLListenerCriteria[]): ESLEventListener[];
```

**Parameters**:

> - `host` - the host element to find subscriptions;
> - `criteria` - an optional set of criteria to filter listeners to remove.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `host` - host element to find subscriptions;
- `criteria` - optional set of criteria to filter listeners to remove.
```

Examples:
- `ESLEventUtils.unsubscribe($host);` will unsubscribe everything bound to `$host`
- `ESLEventUtils.unsubscribe($host, handlerFn);` will unsubscribe everything that is bound to `$host` and is handled by `handlerFn`
- `ESLEventUtils.unsubscribe($host, 'click');` will unsubscribe everything bound to `$host` and processes `click` event
- `ESLEventUtils.unsubscribe($host, 'click', handlerFn);` will unsubscribe everything that is bound to `$host`, processes `click` event and handles `handlerFn`
- There can be any number of criteria.

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.isEventDescriptor`
Predicate to check if the passed argument is a type of `ESLListenerDescriptorFn = ESLEventHandler & Partial<ESLEventDescriptor>`.

```typescript
ESLEventUtils.isEventDescriptor(obj: any): obj is ESLListenerDescriptorFn;
```

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.getAutoDescriptors`

> Method of the `ESLEventUtils` interface that gathers auto-subscribable (collectible) descriptors from the passed object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Method of the `ESLEventUtils` interface that gathers auto-subscribable (collectable) descriptors from the passed object.
```

```typescript
ESLEventUtils.descriptors(host?: any): ESLListenerDescriptorFn[]
```

**Parameters**:

> - `host` - an object to get descriptors from;

Reviewer 4: maybe in such cases we'll not use articles?
```suggestion
- `host` - object to get descriptors from;
```

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.descriptors`
Deprecated alias for `ESLEventUtils.getAutoDescriptors`

### ⚡ `ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor`

> `ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor` - decorate the passed key of the host object as `ESLEventDescriptorFn`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor` - decorates the passed key of the host object as `ESLEventDescriptorFn`
```

```typescript
ESLEventUtils.initDescriptor<T extends object>(
  host: T, 
  key: keyof T & string, 
  desc: ESLEventDescriptorExt
): ESLEventDescriptorFn;
```

**Parameters**:
- `host` - host object holder of decorated function;
- `key` - key of the `host` object that contains a function to decorate;

> - `desc` - `ESLEventDescriptor` (extended) meta information to describe future subscriptions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `desc` - `ESLEventDescriptor` (extended) meta information to describe future subscriptions.
```

  This parameter can be used to overwrite the default behavior of bubbling and being cancelable.

### Listeners Full Showcase Example
```typescript
class TestCases {
  bind() {
    // Subcribes all auto descriptors (onEventAutoDescSugar and onEventAutoDesc)
    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(this); 

>     // Simply subscribe onEventManualFn on click

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Simply subscribes onEventManualFn on click
```

    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(this, 'click', this.onEventManualFn);

>     // Subscribe onEventManualFn on window resize

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Subscribes onEventManualFn on window resize
```

    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(this, {event: 'resize', target: window}, this.onEventManualFn);

>     // Simply subscribe onEventManualFn on click

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Simply subscribes onEventManualFn on click
```

    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(this, 'click', this.onEventManualFn);

>     // Subscribe onEventManualDesc by embeded information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Subscribes onEventManualDesc by embeded information
```

    ESLEventUtils.subscribe(this, this.onEventManualDesc);

>     // Subscribe onEventManualDesc by merged embeded and passed information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // Subscribes onEventManualDesc by merged embeded and passed information
```
